THE RHINE, THE GREAT ARTERY
FEEDING THE HEART OF EUROPE.
THIS IS A RIVER WHICH HAS
CHANGED THE COURSE OF HISTORY.
IT HAS BOTH UNITED AND
DIVIDED EUROPE'S PEOPLE.
ON THE ONE HAND, THE RHINE
IS A VITAL TRADE ROUTE
CONNECTING COUNTRIES
AND CULTURES ON ITS
1,300 KILOMETER JOURNEY
FROM SOURCE TO SEA.
ON THE OTHER HAND, IT'S A
BARRIER BETWEEN NATIONS,
A BORDER TO
BE CROSSED.
THROUGHOUT HISTORY, THE RHINE
HAS KNOWN BLOODY BATTLES
AND HEARD THE
WAIL OF WAR.
BUT TODAY, THIS RIVER AND
ITS PEOPLE ARE FIGHTING
A NEW BATTLE AGAINST THE
EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE
FOR AS THE WORLD WARMS
UP, THE ALPINE GLACIER
WHICH FEEDS THE
RIVER IS MELTING FAST.
IN LESS THAN A CENTURY
THE SOURCE OF THE RHINE
COULD SHRINK
TO NOTHING.
THE MIGHTY WATERS
MIGHT CEASE TO FLOW
AND THE LIVES OF THE
PEOPLE AND COUNTRIES
WHO SHARE THE RHINE
COULD BE CHANGED FOREVER.
THE NETHERLANDS, GERMANY,
FRANCE, LIECHTENSTEIN,
AUSTRIA AND SWITZERLAND.
SIX COUNTRIES TOUCH
THE BANKS OF THE RHINE
BUT FOR MOST OF ITS LENGTH
THIS IS A GERMAN RIVER.
THE RHINE HAS LONG BEEN
A KEY TO GERMAN IDENTITY.
PATRIOTIC MONUMENTS
STAND ALL ALONG ITS BANKS.
IN THE COURSE OF ITS JOURNEY,
THE RHINE PASSES THROUGH
CASTLE RICH GORGES ALIVE
WITH MYTH AND FANTASY
AND IMMORTALIZED IN THE
MUSIC OF RICHARD WAGNER.
THOSE SAME LEGENDS, TWISTED IN
THE NAME OF NATIONALISM AND
RACISM, WERE A SINISTER THEME IN
THE DREADFUL VIOLENCE OF WWII.
THOSE TERRIBLE DAYS
ARE LONG GONE.
BUT NOW ANOTHER WAR IS
BEING WAGED ON THE RHINE
- A FIGHT AGAINST TIME.
FOR AS THE GLACIERS WHICH FEED
THE RHINE CONTINUE TO SHRINK,
THERE IS A REAL DANGER THAT
THE SOURCE OF THE RIVER
WILL DRY UP
COMPLETELY.
THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE AND FARM IN
THE MOUNTAINS RIGHT NEXT TO THE
GLACIER'S SOURCE ARE ACUTELY
AWARE OF THIS IMPENDING THREAT.
TRANSLATOR: MY FATHER ALWAYS
USED TO SAY THAT IT TOOK
10 MINUTES TO WALK FROM
THE VILLAGE TO THE GLACIER
AND NOW THESE DAYS YOU
CAN WALK FOR THREE HOURS
AND YOU'RE STILL
NOT AT THE GLACIER.
>>AS GLOBAL WARMING TAKES ITS
TOLL, THE FUTURE OF EUROPE'S
BUSIEST AND MOST IMPORTANT RIVER
IS ENDANGERED LIKE NEVER BEFORE.
THE RHINE HAS TWO GLACIAL
SOURCES HIGH IN THE SWISS ALPS.
AFTER THEIR TUMULTUOUS
DESCENT THROUGH THE MOUNTAINS
THESE TWO
WATERWAYS JOIN TO FORM
EUROPE'S MOST
ICONIC RIVER.
FLOWING THROUGH THE VINEYARDS OF
FRANCE ALONG THE SPECTACULAR
RHINE GORGE AND THROUGH
GERMANY'S INDUSTRIAL HEART,
THE RHINE TRAVELS
THROUGH THE NETHERLANDS
BEFORE FINALLY REACHING
THE SEA AT ROTTERDAM.
STRETCHING OVER 40
KILOMETERS OF WATERFRONT,
ROTTERDAM IS ONE OF THE
BUSIEST PORTS ON EARTH.
THE RHINE DELTA IS CRUCIAL TO
THE ECONOMIC SUCCESS OF EUROPE.
OVER 400 MILLION TONS OF CARGO
PASS THROUGH HERE EVERY YEAR.
THIS IS WHERE THE RHINE
FLOWS INTO THE NORTH SEA,
WHERE GREAT VESSELS LOADED
WITH GOODS LEAVE EUROPE
AND HEAD FOR THE
REST OF THE WORLD.
TO KEEP THE MASSIVE
VOLUME OF TRAFFIC FLOWING,
300,000 PEOPLE ARE
EMPLOYED AT THE PORT.
PRACTICALLY EVERYTHING HERE
IS COMPUTER CONTROLLED,
EVEN THE SHIPS
NAVIGATE BY RADAR.
BUT IN THIS STRANGELY
SERENE PICTURE,
DISASTER IS
NEVER FAR AWAY...
FOR ROTTERDAM IS MORE
THAN JUST A TRANSIT PORT.
IT'S A MASSIVE INDUSTRIAL
COMPLEX AND THE MOST IMPORTANT
PETROCHEMICAL
SITE IN THE WORLD.
THIS IS A VERY
VOLATILE PLACE.
THOUSANDS OF TONS OF
RAW INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS
ARE REFINED INTO
COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS HERE.
WITH MASSIVE CONTAINERS
OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
AND EXPLOSIVE CHEMICALS
LINING THE RIVERBANK,
FIRE IS ALWAYS
JUST A SPARK AWAY.
WHEN DISASTER STRIKES,
SPECIALIST FIREMEN LIKE
ALEX TRUMAN ARE THE RHINE'S
FIRST AND ONLY LINE OF DEFENSE.
TRANSLATOR: FOR ME, ANYWAY,
IT'S A WAY OF LIFE, ABSOLUTELY.
IT'S IRRESISTIBLE.
IT'S IN THE BLOOD.
MY FATHER IS IN THE FIRE
SERVICE. MY BROTHER TOO.
WITH ME, IT'S DEFINITELY
IN THE BLOOD.
>>IT'S A DANGEROUS
CAREER CHOICE.
WITH EVERY FIRE THAT ALEX
ATTENDS, THE RISK OF
EXPLOSION IS HUGE AS MORE
THAN HALF OF ALL GOODS
WHICH PASS THROUGH THIS PORT
CONTAIN DANGEROUS CARGO.
WHAT'S MORE, THE FEROCIOUS
HEAT OF THE FLAMES COULD
RELEASE TOXIC CHEMICALS
INTO THE ATMOSPHERE,
POISONING THE ENVIRONMENT
AND THE HALF A MILLION
RESIDENTS OF NEARBY
ROTTERDAM CITY.
ALEX AND HIS FAMILY
ARE AMONG THEM.
TRANSLATOR: IF YOU STOPPED TO
THINK ABOUT IT YOU'D BE WORRIED
ABOUT THE DANGEROUS
THINGS THAT COULD HAPPEN.
THE MOMENT YOU FOCUS
ON WHAT COULD GO WRONG
YOU WOULD NOT
BE ABLE TO SLEEP.
>>ALEX'S SKILLS ARE SO
SPECIALIZED THAT COMPANIES
FROM ALL OVER EUROPE SEND
THEIR STAFF TO BE TAUGHT
BY HIS TEAM AT THE PORT'S
DISASTER TRAINING AREA.
THIS COMPLEX EVEN INCLUDES
A GROUNDED TANKER
THAT'S SET ON FIRE SEVERAL
TIMES A DAY SO TRAINEES CAN
PRACTICE HOW TO RESPOND
TO INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENTS.
YET THE DANGER ON THEIR
DOORSTEP SEEMS TO GO
UNNOTICED BY THE MAJORITY
OF PEOPLE IN ROTTERDAM.
TRANSLATOR: I THINK A LOT OF
PEOPLE SEE WHAT IS HAPPENING
AROUND THEM BUT THEY DON'T STOP
TO THINK THINGS COULD GO WRONG.
THEY DON'T EVEN KNOW
WHAT COULD GO WRONG.
>>PERHAPS THEY JUST DON'T
WANT TO THINK ABOUT IT.
MANY OF THESE PEOPLE ARE
EMPLOYED AT THE PORT.
WITHOUT THIS DANGEROUS INDUSTRY
THERE WOULD BE NO JOBS.
BUT THE RHINE HAS
ALWAYS BEEN MORE THAN
JUST AN ECONOMIC
LIFELINE.
IT'S A RIVER WHICH FEEDS
CULTURE AND TRADITION.
BEFORE THEY LEARNED TO CONTROL
THE RIVER, FISHERMEN WOULD TELL
OF RHINE MAIDENS, GOBLINS, AND
OTHER MYSTERIOUS CREATURES
WHICH THEY BELIEVED LIVED
BENEATH THE TREACHEROUS WATERS.
TODAY, THESE FISHERMEN'S TALES
HAVE BECOME FOLKLORE AND THE
DANGEROUS WATERS THAT INSPIRED
THE LEGENDS HAVE BEEN TAMED,
TRANSFORMED INTO A PLACID
WATERWAY FOR INDUSTRY.
BUT IT'S THIS INDUSTRY WHICH
HAS NEARLY KILLED OFF THE ONLY
WAY OF LIFE THE FISHERMEN OF
THE RHINE HAVE EVER KNOWN.
ONE MAN WHO STILL TRAWLS THE
WATERS IS WILKEN DEN BOER.
EVEN THOUGH HE HAS A DEGREE
IN MECHANICAL ENGINEERING,
WILKEN DECIDED TO FOLLOW
IN THE FAMILY TRADITION
OF FISHING FOR A LIVING.
LIKE HIS UNCLE AND
GRANDFATHER BEFORE HIM,
HE SPECIALIZES IN CATCHING
EELS, A POPULAR DELICACY
IN THIS AREA OF
THE NETHERLANDS.
TRANSLATOR: THE EELS COME FROM
THE SARGASSO SEA, NEAR CUBA.
THEY ARRIVE HERE IN
THE RIVER ESTUARY.
THEY SWIM UP RIVER, GROW
AND MATURE, UNTIL THEY'RE
READY TO SPAWN AND THEN
THEY MAKE THEIR WAY BACK
TO THE SARGASSO SEA
WHERE THEY REPRODUCE.
>>BUT SOME THIRTY YEARS
AGO A GOOD CATCH LIKE THIS
WOULD HAVE BEEN
UNTHINKABLE BECAUSE OF
THE VAST AMOUNTS OF
POLLUTION IN THE RIVER.
WILKEN REMEMBERS
THE DIFFICULT TIMES
HIS GRANDFATHER
EXPERIENCED.
TRANSLATOR: POLLUTION DEFINITELY
AFFECTED FISH STOCKS.
SUDDENLY IN THE 60'S THERE
WERE FEWER EELS IN THE RIVER.
>>FOR WILKEN, 1986 WAS A
PARTICULARLY BAD YEAR.
JUST A FEW MONTHS AFTER HE
BECAME A PROFESSIONAL FISHERMAN
A CHEMICAL FACTORY UPSTREAM
OF ROTTERDAM PORT EXPLODED,
SPEWING TOXIC FERTILIZER
INTO THE WATERS.
THE RIVER TURNED RED AND
NEARLY ALL THE FISH PERISHED.
WILKEN REALIZED THEN THAT HIS
LIVELIHOOD WAS IN DANGER.
TODAY HE'S ONE OF
ONLY SIX FISHERMEN LEFT
TO PLY THEIR TRADE AMONG
THE MASSIVE TANKERS
AND CARGO SHIPS
IN ROTTERDAM PORT.
BUT THE TIDE OF FORTUNE MAY BE
CHANGING AS THE AUTHORITIES
RECENTLY MADE A CONCERTED
EFFORT TO CLEAN UP THE WATERS.
TRANSLATOR: IN THE LAST
FEW YEARS WE'VE SEEN
MUCH MORE SALMON.
THEY VIRTUALLY DIED
OUT DUE TO POLLUTION.
IN THE 50'S AND 60'S WE HARDLY
CAUGHT ANY BUT IN RECENT YEARS
WE'VE STARTED TO CATCH A
FEW HUNDRED A YEAR AGAIN.
>>AS THE FISH RETURN TO THE
RHINE, WILKEN HOPES THAT ONE DAY
HIS SONS WILL JOIN HIM AND
CARRY ON THE FAMILY TRADITION.
FURTHER UP STREAM HOWEVER,
THE RHINE AND ITS PEOPLE
SHARE A MORE
PAINFUL LEGACY;
ONE OF SUFFERING,
TYRANNY AND WAR.
AT THE EASTERN EDGE OF THE
NETHERLANDS, NEAR THE BORDER
WITH GERMANY, THE RHINE FORMS
A NATURAL BOUNDARY BETWEEN
THE TWO COUNTRIES - A
FRONTIER TO BE BREACHED.
THIS IS A RIVER THAT HAS HEARD
THE FEET OF MARCHING ARMIES
AND THE THUNDER
OF BOMBS.
NEVER WAS THE WAIL OF WAR LOUDER
FOR THE RHINE THAN DURING WWII.
AS THE ALLIES ADVANCED,
ADOLF HITLER USED THE RIVER
AS THE LAST LINE OF DEFENSE
TO PROTECT GERMANY
AND THE NAZI-OCCUPIED
TERRITORIES.
CAUGHT UP IN THE
HEAVY CROSSFIRE
WERE THE PEOPLE LIVING
ALONG THE RHINE'S BANKS.
TANNO PIETESSEY WAS
ONLY 12 WHEN THE GERMANS
FIRST OCCUPIED THE
DUTCH TOWN OF ARNHEM.
HE REMEMBERS GROWING UP
IN AN ATMOSPHERE OF FEAR
AND SUSPICION; WHERE YOU
LOOKED OVER YOUR SHOULDER
BEFORE TALKING
TO YOUR NEIGHBOR.
TRANSLATOR: THE
OCCUPATION HAD ALL KINDS OF
UNPLEASANT CONSEQUENCES
FOR OUR COUNTRY...
PERSECUTION, CONCENTRATION
CAMPS, MURDER AND DEATH.
>>THEN IN SEPTEMBER 1944
THE BRITISH HATCHED A PLAN,
CODE NAMED "OPERATION
MARKET GARDEN",
TO TRY AND BRING THE
WAR TO A RAPID END.
THROUGH THE LARGE-SCALE USE OF
AIRBORNE FORCES THE ALLIES HOPED
TO CAPTURE SEVERAL VITAL BRIDGES
- INCLUDING THIS ONE AT ARNHEM -
ALLOWING THEM TO ADVANCE
INTO THE HEART OF GERMANY.
BUT OPERATION MARKET GARDEN
WAS A TERRIBLE FAILURE.
TRANSLATOR: ARNHEM TURNED
OUT TO BE A BRIDGE TOO FAR
BUT WE DID NOT
KNOW THAT THEN.
>>BECAUSE IT TOOK THREE DAYS
TO DROP 30,000 PARATROOPERS,
THE BRITISH LOST MORE THAN
JUST THE ELEMENT OF SURPRISE.
THOUSANDS OF ALLIED
SOLDIERS WERE KILLED,
MOST NEVER EVEN
REACHING THE BRIDGE.
OTHERS TOOK REFUGE
IN PEOPLE'S HOMES
ONLY TO BE TRACKED
DOWN AND SHOT.
THE GERMANS STARTED BURNING
HOUSES THEY SUSPECTED
OF HARBORING
BRITISH SOLDIERS.
A DEDICATED MEMBER
OF THE RED CROSS,
TANNO WAS UNDETERRED
BY THE THREATS.
TRANSLATOR: WHEN WE ARRIVED
THEY SAID "YOU WERE LUCKY,
YOU'VE JUST DRIVEN
THROUGH THE FRONT LINE".
BUT, YES, SO WHAT?
NOTHING HAPPENED.
THAT WAS MY PERFORMANCE
DURING THE BATTLE OF ARNHEM,
SIMPLY FETCHING
FOOD FOR THOSE PEOPLE
WHO HAD FLED THEIR
BURNING HOMES.
>>IT WAS TO BE ANOTHER NINE
MONTHS BEFORE THE ALLIES WOULD
SUCCEED IN CROSSING THE RHINE
AND THE WAR WOULD FINALLY END.
TODAY FOR VETERANS LIKE TANNO
PIETESSEY THE BRIDGE AT ARNHEM
STANDS AS A PROUD TRIBUTE
TO THEIR HERITAGE AND TO
THE FIGHT TO PROTECT THEIR
LIBERTY AND THEIR HOMES.
FOR SOME, HOWEVER, HOME
AND A FAMILIAR WAY OF LIFE
ARE NOT DEFINED
BY A SINGLE PLACE.
HOME IS THE
RIVER ITSELF.
FOR HUNDREDS OF YEARS
THESE CARGO BARGES
HAVE MOVED IN PROCESSION
UP AND DOWN THE RHINE,
PILOTED BY THE FAMILIES WHO
OWN THEM AND WHO LIVE ON BOARD.
HERR VELDTMAN AND HIS WIFE
BOTH COME FROM A FAMILY
OF RHINE BARGE OWNERS
WHO MAKE THEIR LIVING
TRANSPORTING GOODS
UP AND DOWN THE RIVER.
THEY'VE GROWN
UP ON THE WATER.
TRANSLATOR: WE'VE BEEN
SAILING TOGETHER SINCE 1984,
ME AND MY
WIFE, RHEA.
WE STARTED ON A
SMALLER SHIP OF 700 TON.
AFTER THAT WE HAD A
SHIP BUILT OF 1,500 TON
AND THIS ONE IS FIVE
YEARS OLD AND IS 3,000 TON.
WE SAIL NEARLY CONTINUOUSLY
- 18 HOURS, 17 OR 16 -
DEPENDING ON HOW MUCH TIME YOU
HAVE AND WHERE YOU'RE GOING.
>>THOUGH THEY DO HAVE A
HOME ON DRY LAND IN THE
NETHERLANDS WHERE THE
CHILDREN GO TO SCHOOL,
THEY SPEND A GREAT DEAL OF THEIR
LIFE AFLOAT IN SOME COMFORT.
TRANSLATOR: OKAY,
THIS IS THE KITCHEN.
HERE WE HAVE OUR MEALS AT
LUNCHTIME AND IN THE EVENING.
THIS IS THE OVEN AND
THE ELECTRICAL THINGS
LIKE THE MICROWAVE, THE
FRIDGE AND THE FREEZER.
THIS IS THE
LIVING ROOM.
THIS IS THE TABLE
THAT WE EAT AT
WHEN WE HAVE FAMILY
AND FRIENDS OVER.
THE LOUNGE AND
OUR SON, STEPHAN.
THIS IS WHERE WE
RELAX... THE TELEVISION,
AND THIS IS OUR ELDEST
SON'S BEDROOM.
>>AS THEY JOURNEY ALONG THE
RIVER, BARGE FAMILIES WITNESS
FIRST HAND THE EVER-CHANGING
HISTORY OF THE RHINE
AND THE LAND THROUGH
WHICH IT TRAVELS.
LEAVING THE NETHERLANDS, THE
VELDTMANS CROSS THE BORDER
INTO GERMANY AND
TOWARDS DUISBURG,
A TOWN STEEPED IN
ITS INDUSTRIAL PAST.
STRATEGICALLY POSITIONED AT THE
CONFLUENCE WHERE THE RHINE
MEETS THE RIVER RUHR, IT
WAS HERE THAT THE FAT SEAMS
OF COAL AND IRON ORE MINED
FROM THE RIVER VALLEYS
CAME TOGETHER TO BE
PROCESSED INTO STEEL.
IN THE 19TH CENTURY
DUISBURG WAS A BOOMTOWN
AND THE LARGEST INLAND
PORT IN THE WORLD.
OVER HALF A MILLION PEOPLE
WERE EMPLOYED HERE
IN THE DIRTY AND
DANGEROUS HEAVY INDUSTRIES.
STEEL MADE IN DUISBURG
COULD BE SAILED DOWN RIVER
AND EXPORTED
DIRECTLY TO SEA.
TODAY THE WORKINGS OF THE
OLD INDUSTRIAL POWERHOUSE
ARE RUSTING AWAY.
COAL AND IRON ARE NO LONGER THE
BACKBONE OF THE LOCAL ECONOMY
AND DUISBURG IS SHAKING
OFF THE SHACKLES
OF ITS POLLUTED
INDUSTRIAL PAST.
INSTEAD OF BELCHING
OUT POISONOUS GASES,
THIS ENORMOUS OLD
STEEL PLANT HAS BEEN
CONVERTED INTO A
LEISURE FACILITY.
THE OLD GASOMETER HAS
BECOME A SCUBA DIVING SCHOOL.
NOTHING MUCH IS PRODUCED
IN DUISBURG ANYMORE
BUT IT'S STILL A THRIVING
CENTER OF TRADE.
THIS MARKS THE LAST
POINT INLAND ALONG WHICH
THE RHINE CAN RECEIVE
OCEAN-GOING VESSELS.
AT DUISBURG, LARGE SHIPS
MUST TRANSFER THEIR GOODS
ONTO SMALLER BOATS
AND VICE VERSA.
IT'S IN THIS TRANSFER
AND TRADING OF CARGO
THAT THE CITY
MAKES ITS MONEY.
THE VELDTMAN'S BARGE IS JUST
ONE OF 20,000 CARGO VESSELS
WHICH PASS THROUGH
DUISBURG EVERY YEAR.
WHEN THEY REACH PORT, THEY'LL
UNLOAD THE STEEL WHICH THEY'RE
CARRYING, FRAU VELDTMAN WILL
TAKE THEIR JAGUAR OFF THE DECK
AND DRIVE BACK TO THE
NETHERLANDS WHILE HER HUSBAND
RETRACES THEIR JOURNEY
WITH A DIFFERENT LOAD.
IN TIMES GONE BY, HOWEVER,
PEOPLE WOULD HAVE DISMISSED
THE NOTION OF FREE TRADE
ALONG THE RHINE AS NONSENSE.
UPSTREAM OF DUISBURG,
THE FRENCH AND GERMANS
IN PARTICULAR PUSHED
AND PULLED OVER THE RIGHT
TO CONTROL THIS
VALUABLE TRADE ROUTE.
THE RIVER TOWN OF
KOBLENZ HAS A LONG HISTORY
OF DISPUTED
OWNERSHIP.
THIS CONFLUENCE OF THE
FRENCH RIVER, MOSELLE,
AND THE MIGHTY RHINE
HAS CHANGED HANDS
BETWEEN FRANCE
AND GERMANY
SEVERAL TIMES OVER IN
THE LAST THOUSAND YEARS.
NOW THE HEADLAND THAT
DEFINES THE RIVER JUNCTION
HAS BEEN DECLARED
PROUDLY GERMAN.
KNOWN AS DEUTSCHES ECK,
THE GERMAN CORNER,
THIS POPULAR TOURIST
ATTRACTION IS ACTUALLY A
CELEBRATION OF THE LEGACY
OF ONE MAN: EMPEROR WILHELM I.
AT THE END OF
THE 19TH CENTURY,
WILHELM WAS HERALDED THE
FIRST EMPEROR OF GERMANY.
HE UNIFIED ALL THE PREVIOUSLY
DISPARATE GERMAN STATES
INTO ONE POWERFUL FORCE -
A FORCE THAT WAS TO BE USED
AND MISUSED IN THE NAME
OF GERMAN NATIONALISM.
TODAY THE POLITICS OF OLD EUROPE
ARE CONSIGNED TO THE PAST
AND IT'S LEFT TO THE TOURISTS,
GERMAN AND INTERNATIONAL ALIKE,
TO APPRECIATE THE STATUE
FOR WHAT IT REALLY IS:
A BEAUTIFUL MONUMENT.
BUT DEUTSCHES ECK IS NOT
THE END OF WILHELM'S LEGACY
TO GERMANY
AND TO EUROPE.
HE AND HIS GOVERNMENT
WERE INSTRUMENTAL IN THE
EARLY STRAIGHTENING OF
THE RHINE RIVER CHANNEL.
IN THE EARLY 1800'S THE RIVER
WAS KNOWN AS THE "WILD RHINE"
WITH NUMEROUS CHANNELS
AND HUNDREDS OF ISLANDS.
THE CONSTANT RISE
AND FALL OF THE WATER
WAS FLOODING VILLAGES
AND VALUABLE FERTILE LANDS.
SO, AS PART OF A SCHEME
TO CONTROL THE RIVER,
WILHELM AND HIS
GOVERNMENT IMPLEMENTED
A RIGOROUS PROCESS OF
STRAIGHTENING THE RHINE.
TWO HUNDRED YEARS LATER, AND
TODAY THE BANKS OF THE RIVER
HAVE BEEN DRAMATICALLY
TRANSFORMED FROM A NETWORK
OF SMALLER WATERWAYS
INTO A SINGLE LARGE ONE
- EFFECTIVELY A CANAL
CUTTING THROUGH EUROPE.
THIS NEW, DEEPER, WIDER RIVER
HAS ENABLED BOATS FROM ACROSS
THE CONTINENT TO COME TOGETHER
AND SHARE GOODS AND CULTURES.
BUT THIS FREE TRADE
FACILITATES THE PASSAGE
OF MORE THAN JUST
BARGES AND THEIR LOAD,
FOR AS SHIPS PASS MORE FREELY
THROUGH THE WATERWAYS
THEY CARRY AN UNWELCOME
AND POTENTIALLY LETHAL CARGO.
TRANSLATOR: A LOT OF
SHIPS CARRY BALLASTS
TO KEEP THE
SHIPS BALANCED.
AS THEY ARE TRAVELING
THROUGH FOREIGN COUNTRIES
THEY DRAW AND RELEASE WATER
TO REGULATE THAT BALANCE -
DEPENDING ON HOW HEAVILY
LADEN THEY ARE -
TRANSPORTING RIVER
CREATURES WITH THEM.
>>FOR DOCTOR STEPHAN NEHRIG
CHECKING ON THE CREATURES
THAT LIVE IN AND AROUND THE
RHINE IS A FAVORITE HOBBY.
WHAT BEGAN AS A CHILDHOOD
FASCINATION WITH THE RIVER
HAS LED TO A CAREER
AS A MARINE BIOLOGIST.
AND THE THINGS HE'S
FINDING AMONG THE STONES
ARE WORRYING HIM.
TRANSLATOR: IT IS VERY
INTERESTING WHAT CAN BE FOUND
UNDER THESE STONES IN
THE BANKS OF THE RHINE.
QUITE A FEW
CREATURES LIVE HERE.
WE SEE A
LITTLE SHRIMP.
THIS IS A CRUSTACEAN WHICH
COMES FROM THE BLACK SEA
AND CAME TO THE RHINE
OVER THE MAIN-DANUBE CANAL.
IT'S A PREDATOR AND IT LOVES
EATING THE OTHER SHRIMPS
WHICH ARE INDIGENOUS TO
THIS REGION AND THAT'S WHY
IT'S CALLED, IN THE SCIENCE
WORLD, THE KILLER SHRIMP.
>>THE NUMBERS OF THESE TINY
AND DEADLY KILLER SHRIMP
HAVE INCREASED STEADILY AS THE
MAP OF EUROPE HAS CHANGED.
TRANSLATOR: ITS NATURAL HOME IS,
IN FACT, THE BLACK SEA REGION,
BUT IN THE 1980'S THIS CREATURE
TRAVELED ALONG THE DANUBE
AND WAS FOUND IN GERMANY
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN 1991.
WE THINK THIS HAPPENED BECAUSE
THE EASTERN BLOC COUNTRIES
OPENED THEMSELVES UP TO
THE WEST AND THAT LED TO
AN INCREASE IN THE MOVEMENT
OF SHIPPING ON THE DANUBE.
>>BUT THE KILLER SHRIMP'S
VORACIOUS APPETITE
HAS CAUSED THE EXTINCTION
OF MANY NATIVE SPECIES
AND IT'S IMPOSSIBLE TO
TURN BACK THE CLOCK.
TRANSLATOR: EXOTIC
AND FOREIGN CREATURES
NEVER BECOME
INDIGENOUS.
THEY'RE ALWAYS
CONSIDERED TO BE EXOTIC
AND ARE A THREAT TO THE
LOCAL PLANTS AND WILDLIFE.
EITHER THEY EAT THEM OR THEY ALL
ADAPT AND THEN THEY BECOME
EXACTLY THE SAME AS EACH OTHER
AND THAT'S WHAT'S CALLED
THE "MACDONALDIZATION"
OF THE ENVIRONMENT.
>>FURTHER UPSTREAM THE
RHINE HOSTS A DIFFERENT KIND
OF FOREIGN TRAVELER.
A POPULAR TOURIST DESTINATION,
THIS GERMAN STRETCH OF RIVER
IS KNOWN AS THE
"ROMANTIC RHINE"
AND IS STEEPED IN
MYTH AND LEGEND.
THE HIGHLIGHT OF THE TOURIST
TRAIL IS HERE AT LORELEI ROCK.
MADE FAMOUS IN THE FOLKLORE, THE
STORY GOES THAT A YOUNG MAIDEN,
BETRAYED BY HER PHILANDERING
FIANCE, FALLS TO HER DEATH.
FROM HER WATERY GRAVE SHE LURES
UNSUSPECTING SAILORS WHO,
BEWITCHED BY HER BEAUTY, TAKE
THEIR EYES OFF THE TASK OF
NAVIGATING THE MOST TREACHEROUS
STRETCH OF THE RHINE AND PERISH.
THE FOLK STORY OF THE RHINE
MAIDEN OF THE LORELEI
ECHOES A
HISTORICAL TRUTH.
THE RHINE HERE HAS ALWAYS
BEEN A VERY DIFFICULT
STRETCH OF RIVER
TO NAVIGATE.
THE ROCKS ARE CLOSE TO THE
SURFACE AND SHIFTING CURRENTS
DRAW UNSOPHISTICATED CRAFT
INTO DANGEROUS WATERS.
MANY SAILORS HAVE
LOST THEIR LIVES.
THIS ISN'T THE ONLY FOLKLORE
WHICH CONNECTS THE WATERS
OF THE RHINE WITH
QUINTESSENTIAL GERMAN MYTHS.
THE STORY OF A HOARD OF GOLD
SAID TO BE STOLEN FROM THREE
OTHER RHINE MAIDENS IS WHAT
INSPIRED RICHARD WAGNER TO
COMPOSE HIS FAMOUS OPERATIC
CYCLE, THE RING OF THE NIBELUNG.
THE RHINE MAIDENS' LEGENDARY
BEAUTY WAS TO BECOME A BLUEPRINT
FOR THE ARYAN IDEAL OF A
BLONDE AND BLUE EYED RACE.
AN IDEAL USED AS A PROPAGANDA
TOOL FOR HITLER'S BRUTAL REGIME
AND THE TERRIBLE
PERSECUTIONS CARRIED OUT
IN THE NAME OF
RACIAL PURITY.
THIS IS THE OLDEST JEWISH
CEMETERY IN GERMANY.
ALL THE GRAVES HERE
DATE BACK TO BEFORE WWII
AND THEY TELL A TALE OF A LARGE
AND SUCCESSFUL COMMUNITY.
THIS IS HEILIGE SANDS IN
THE RIVER CITY OF WORMS.
THERE ARE SOME JEWS
LIVING IN WORMS TODAY
BUT THESE ARE RECENT
RUSSIAN IMMIGRANTS.
THE GERMAN JEWS WHO'D
MADE WORMS THEIR HOME
SINCE MEDIEVAL TIMES WERE,
QUITE SIMPLY, WIPED OUT.
ON NOVEMBER 9, 1938 THE NAZIS
UNLEASHED A WAVE OF VIOLENCE
AGAINST
GERMANY'S JEWS.
IN THE SPACE OF A FEW HOURS
THOUSANDS OF SYNAGOGUES AND
JEWISH BUSINESSES AND HOMES
WERE DAMAGED OR DESTROYED.
THIS WAS CALLED,
CHILLINGLY, "KRISTALLNACHT".
KRISTALLNACHT MEANS "NIGHT
OF GLASS" AND REFERS TO
THE SHATTERED WINDOW PANES
THAT CARPETED THE STREETS.
BUT IT ALSO COMMEMORATES
THE SHATTERED LIVES
OF THOSE JEWS LIVING IN
GERMANY DURING WWII.
MORE THAN 70 YEARS LATER
AND PEOPLE OF ALL FAITHS
AND CULTURES ARE
LIVING AND WORKING
IN THE STREETS OF
WORMS ONCE MORE.
THESE OLD COBBLES ECHO
WITH THE SOUND OF NEW LIFE.
IT'S A MULTICULTURALISM THAT
IS REFLECTED IN COMMUNITIES
UP AND DOWN THE RHINE AS PEOPLE
FROM MANY NATIONS WERE INVITED
TO WORK IN GERMANY DURING
THE POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION.
THE LARGEST GROUP OF FOREIGN
RESIDENTS CAME FROM TURKEY.
HASAN OZDEMIR IS A TURKISH
AUTHOR AND POET WHO ARRIVED
IN GERMANY AS A 16-YEAR-OLD
AND NEVER WENT HOME.
HASAN IS ONE OF AN ESTIMATED
1.7 MILLION TURKISH IMMIGRANTS
IN GERMANY.
HE LIVES HERE IN LUDWIGSHAFEN, A
FEW MILES UPRIVER FROM WORMS.
IN THE LATTER HALF OF THE 20TH
CENTURY THIS CITY GREW RAPIDLY
AS TURKISH IMMIGRANTS
FLOODED IN TO PLUG THE ACUTE
LABOR SHORTAGE
CAUSED BY WWII.
AT FIRST THESE MIGRANTS
WERE TO BE GUEST WORKERS,
COMING TO WORK FOR A LIMITED
PERIOD OF TIME ONLY.
MEN ARRIVED WITHOUT
THEIR FAMILIES AND TOOK
POORLY PAID FACTORY JOBS
CONSIDERED TOO DANGEROUS
OR TOO DIRTY FOR
GERMAN WORKERS.
BUT INCREASINGLY THE IMMIGRANTS
SENT FOR THEIR WIVES AND
CHILDREN AND SETTLED IN SMALL
COMMUNITIES ACROSS GERMANY.
IT WAS A DIFFICULT
PROCESS OF INTEGRATION.
IN THE EARLY YEARS
TENSIONS FLARED BETWEEN
THE TURKS AND GERMANS.
TODAY, THE IMMIGRANTS HAVE
CREATED A HOME FROM HOME
IN THE INNER
CITY AREAS.
MANY OF TODAY'S TURKS
LIVING IN GERMANY
NOW CONSIDER THEMSELVES
FIRST GENERATION GERMANS.
TRANSLATOR: THE TERM
"GASTARBEITER", THAT IS
"FOREIGNER", IS A TERM
I REJECT COMPLETELY.
YOU JUST SHOULDN'T CALL
IMMIGRANTS THAT ANYMORE
BECAUSE NOW THEY ARE A BIG
PART OF THE SOCIETY HERE.
WE CAN'T IMAGINE GERMANY
WITHOUT IMMIGRANTS NOW.
GERMANY HAS
CHANGED COMPLETELY
AND THERE IS A NEW
GENERATION GROWING UP HERE
WHO HAVE TAKEN ON A
RESPONSIBILITY TO THIS COUNTRY
AND BECAUSE OF THAT, THEY
SHOULD BE CALLED GERMANS.
AND WHEN YOU SPEAK
OF FOREIGNERS
THEN YOU SHOULD CONSIDER
GERMANS, TOO, AS FOREIGNERS
BECAUSE THEY DON'T KNOW
THE REAL GERMANY ANYMORE.
>>AS THE OLD PREJUDICES ARE
FADING, THE ATMOSPHERE IN THIS
RIVER TOWN NOW IS MORE ABOUT
ACCEPTANCE AND TOLERANCE.
A NEW MOSQUE HAS BEEN
BUILT IN LUDWIGSHAFEN
AND PEOPLE OF ALL
FAITHS ARE WELCOME HERE.
THEY EVEN ENCOURAGE
SCHOOL TRIPS
TO VISIT AND TO
LEARN ABOUT ISLAM.
IT'S AN OPENNESS THAT'S
ENCOURAGED HASAN
TO EMBRACE HIS
NEW WAY OF LIFE.
NOW THIS TURKISH POET,
INSPIRED BY A RIVER,
WRITES ALL HIS
WORK IN GERMAN.
TRANSLATOR: THE RHINE IS A
VERY IMPORTANT ELEMENT TO ME,
FROM A LITERARY
STANDPOINT, TOO.
TO ME, THE RHINE IS A
SYMBOL OF MOVEMENT.
THE RIVER FLOWS AND I
CAN DESCRIBE THE RIVER
LIKE AN IMMIGRANT.
THE RIVER SEPARATES
THE COUNTRIES,
COMING BETWEEN PEOPLE AS IT
FLOWS THROUGH TOWNS, ETC.
THE RIVER IS ON A
CONTINUOUS JOURNEY,
AND, AS IT CHANGES,
IT FLOWS.
AND IN CHANGING IT
GATHERS STRENGTH
AND FLOWS FASTER
ALL THE TIME.
>>UPSTREAM OF LUDWIGSHAFEN,
THE RIVER THAT IS HASAN'S
CREATIVE INSPIRATION
CONTINUES TO CHANGE.
THIS TIME FROM A GERMAN
TO A FRENCH RIVER.
HERE, THE WATERS
ALSO FORM A NATURAL
AND LONG-DISPUTED
BOUNDARY BETWEEN NATIONS.
WITH FRENCH
ALSACE-LORRAINE ON ONE SIDE
AND THE GERMAN BLACK
FOREST ON THE OTHER,
THE RHINE NOW DIVIDES THE
TWO COUNTRIES THAT HAVE
PUSHED AND PULLED OVER ITS
BANKS FOR HUNDREDS OF YEARS.
IT'S THE COMMUNITIES
IN THIS REGION
THAT HAVE HAD TO
FACE THE CONSEQUENCES.
ORIGINALLY FRENCH CITIZENS, THE
ALSATIAN PEOPLE BECAME PRUSSIANS
FOLLOWING THE FRANCO-PRUSSIAN
WAR OF THE 19TH CENTURY.
FIFTY YEARS LATER, FOLLOWING
THE FIRST WORLD WAR,
THEY BECAME
FRENCH AGAIN.
JEAN HUGEL'S FAMILY HAVE BEEN
WINE GROWERS IN RIQUEWIHR IN THE
REGION OF ALSACE FOR NEARLY 400
YEARS AND THEY'VE PERSONALLY
FELT THE TUG OF TWO NATIONS
FIGHTING FOR THEIR LOYALTY.
TRANSLATOR: MY GRANDFATHER
WAS BORN A FRENCHMAN IN 1869
BUT BECAME A
PRUSSIAN IN 1871.
1918, HE WAS FRENCH
AGAIN AND DURING THE WAR
THE NAZIS TOOK ALSACE WITH
AN IRON FIST AND ATTACKED US,
SO WE HAD TO BECOME
HITLER SUPPORTERS.
NOT THE REAL US,
BUT IN APPEARANCE.
MY GRANDFATHER DIED A
FRENCHMAN AGAIN IN 1950.
SEEMS VERY STRANGE, ALL
THIS CHANGING OF NATIONALITY
BUT IT WAS ONE BIG
FAMILY DRAMA AT THE TIME.
WE WERE ALWAYS IN THE WRONG
ARMY, ALWAYS ON THE LOSING SIDE.
WHEN YOU PUT THE ALSATIANS INTO
AN ARMY IT'S THE ONE THAT LOSES,
AND AFTER THAT WE ARE BACK
WITH THE WINNERS AGAIN.
IT'S A COMPLICATED STORY
BUT AT LEAST IT'S MADE US
INTO PROPER EUROPEANS.
>>ALTHOUGH LIVING NEXT DOOR TO
THE RHINE BROUGHT A MAJOR
IDENTITY CRISIS IT'S ALSO
BROUGHT A LOT OF WEALTH
TO THE FAMILY
WINE BUSINESS.
TRANSLATOR: FROM HERE
WE HAVE A GREAT VIEW
OF THE VINEYARDS
OF ALSACE.
TO THE RIGHT, THE VOSGES,
THE RHINE PLAIN,
AND THE RHINE RIVER A LITTLE
FURTHER AWAY, NOT TOO CLOSE.
IT WOULD BE
DANGEROUS.
AND THEN THERE IS THE
BLACK FOREST AND FROM
THE POINT OF VIEW OF THE
RIVER IT IS THE MOST SOUTHERLY
POINT OF THE RIVER WHERE
THE WATER GOES NORTH
SO IT'S IDEALLY PLACED FOR THE
BUSINESS OF EXPORTING WINE.
>>JEAN HUGEL AND THE OTHER
VINEYARD OWNERS IN ALSACE
EXPORT MOST OF THEIR WINE
DIRECTLY DOWN THE RHINE
TO OTHER PARTS OF
EUROPE AND THE WORLD.
TRANSLATOR: TO MAKE MONEY IN THE
WINE BUSINESS YOU NEED TO SELL
THE PRODUCT TO PEOPLE WHO HAVE
MONEY BUT NO WINE THEMSELVES,
AND FOR US THOSE PEOPLE
ARE IN NOTHERN EUROPE.
BECAUSE OF THE RHINE
WE CAN SHARE OUR WINE
WITH PEOPLE IN
THE LOWER LANDS.
IF YOU DROP A CORK
IN THE RIVER HERE,
IT WILL REACH THE END OF
ITS JOURNEY IN ROTTERDAM.
>>DESPITE HAVING TO CHANGE THEIR
NATIONALITY SEVERAL TIMES,
JEAN HUGEL'S FAMILY HAVE
SURVIVED AS WINE MAKERS
AGAINST ALL ODDS.
BUT THEIR FUTURE DEPENDS
ON THE SURVIVAL OF THE RHINE
AND THE RIVER IS UNDER
THREAT - NOT ONLY FROM
THE MELTING OF ITS SOURCE
HIGH IN THE SWISS ALPS
BUT FROM
POLLUTION, TOO.
FURTHER UP RIVER, THE RHINE
CROSSES THE BORDER OF A FOURTH
COUNTRY, SWITZERLAND, WHICH IS
ALSO HOME TO THE TWIN SOURCES
OF THE RHINE, THE VORDERRHIEN
AND HINTERRHEIN RIVERS.
AS A LANDLOCKED COUNTRY,
THE RIVER IS CENTRAL TO
SWITZERLAND'S
ECONOMIC SUCCESS.
MARKING THIS JUNCTION WHERE
THE RHINE ENTERS SWITZERLAND
IS THE SWISS-GERMAN CITY
OF BIEL, A WEALTHY CENTER
OF COMMERCE ESTABLISHED
ON THE PROCEEDS
OF SPECIALTY CHEMICAL
AND DRUG INDUSTRIES.
BUT FOR THE RIVER
AND THE PEOPLE OF BIEL
SUCCESS HAS
COME AT A PRICE.
IRENE VIGGA HAS LIVED
IN BIEL ALL HER LIFE.
1986 IS A YEAR WHICH SHE
REMEMBERS ALL TOO VIVIDLY.
IT WAS IN THIS YEAR THAT A FIRE
ENGULFED A RIVERSIDE FACTORY
CAUSING A DISASTROUS
CHEMICAL SPILL
WHICH TURNED
THE RHINE RED.
DOWNSTREAM AS FAR AS ROTTERDAM,
THE POLLUTION KILLED WILDLIFE
AND DEVASTATED THE
RHINE FISHING INDUSTRY.
IN BIEL, WHERE IT ALL BEGAN, THE
POISON ALSO HUNG IN THE AIR.
TRANSLATOR: I
REMEMBER IT WELL,
IT WAS THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT
WHEN WE HEARD THE SIRENS
AND WE WERE WARNED
TO CLOSE OUR WINDOWS.
THERE WAS A SMELL
IN THE AIR...
IT WAS LIKE
ROTTEN EGGS.
THAT WAS THE START OF POLLUTION
WHICH LASTED FOR YEARS
UNTIL THE WATER AND
THE AIR WAS CLEAN AGAIN.
>>EXTRA SPECIAL CARE IS TAKEN
TO TEST THE PURITY OF THE WATER
IN THE RIVER
THESE DAYS.
THAT'S THE WORK
OF THESE SCIENTISTS
IN THE RHINE WATER
QUALITY MONITORING STATION.
THIS WATER CONTAINS THE
EFFLUENT OF 600,000 PEOPLE.
IT'S NOW DRINKABLE
WHEN BOILED.
THAT'S QUITE A BOAST.
TRANSLATOR: THINGS ARE BETTER
NOW AND THERE ARE PROVISIONS
IN PLACE THAT SHOULD PREVENT
THE SAME THING HAPPENING AGAIN,
BUT ONE SEES IT SOMEHOW LIKE
POWDER IN THE BARREL OF A GUN.
>>TODAY IN BIEL THERE'S A REAL
DETERMINATION TO PROTECT THE
RHINE FROM THE ILL EFFECTS
OF DEVELOPMENT, BUT THERE'S
ALSO A REAL DESIRE TO PRESERVE
THE INDUSTRIAL HERITAGE
WHICH HAS BROUGHT
SUCH WEALTH TO THE CITY.
IRENE IS ONE OF THE LEADERS
OF A COMMUNITY PROJECT
WHICH AIMS
TO DO BOTH.
TRANSLATOR: WE LIVE IN THE AREA
AND WE LOVE THE OLD FACTORIES
AND WE DECIDED TO TRY AND
CREATE A CULTURAL MEETING POINT
FOR THE COMMUNITY.
THIS OLD MACHINE FACTORY
BELONGED TO A WORLD FAMOUS
COMPANY BUT THEY MOVED OUT
BECAUSE THERE WASN'T ENOUGH
ROOM TO EXPAND AND THEY
JUST LEFT THE BUILDING EMPTY.
WE THOUGHT IT WOULD BE A
GOOD IDEA TO BRING NEW LIFE
TO THE PLACE FOR THE
SAKE OF THE COMMUNITY.
>>WITH A LIBRARY, A RESTAURANT
AND EVEN A CIRCUS SKILL SCHOOL,
THIS IS NOW A PLACE FOR
THE WHOLE COMMUNITY
AND THE RHINE
IS AT ITS HEART.
TRANSLATOR: THIS CENTER IS SOME
DISTANCE AWAY FROM THE RHINE
AND AT THE BEGINNING
WE WERE CRITICIZED
BECAUSE IT WAS NOT IN
THE CENTER OF TOWN.
BUT I THINK THAT EVEN HERE YOU
FEEL THE FLOW OF THE RHINE.
>>FROM SOURCE TO SEA, THE
RHINE AND ITS MIGHTY WATERS
SHAPE THE LIVES OF ALL THOSE
WHO LIVE ON THE RIVERBANK.
BUT WHAT HAPPENS IF THE FLOW
OF THE GREAT RHINE IS REDUCED
AS ITS SOURCE MELTS AND
EVENTUALLY DRIES UP COMPLETELY?
IT'S A SOBERING THOUGHT
THAT THESE MAGNIFICENT
RHINE WATERFALLS,
THE LARGEST IN EUROPE,
COULD BE REDUCED TO
SLOW MOVING WATERS.
APPROXIMATELY 700 CUBIC METERS
OF WATER POUR OVER THESE ROCKS
EVERY SECOND DEPENDING
ON THE TIME OF YEAR.
IN THE SUMMER THE RHINE'S
GLACIAL SOURCE MELTS
MORE QUICKLY AND SO THE WATER
FLOWS MORE POWERFULLY.
BUT AS OUR CLIMATE CHANGES,
THE SEASONS ARE MERGING INTO
EACH OTHER AND THE ICE IS
MELTING THROUGHOUT THE YEAR.
IF THE WORLD
CONTINUES TO GET WARMER,
THE GLACIER WILL EVENTUALLY
DISAPPEAR AND THE GREAT RHINE
COULD BECOME NOTHING
MORE THAN A STREAM.
EVERYTHING ABOUT THE RIVER WILL
CHANGE - ITS PHYSICAL PRESENCE
AND ITS VITAL ROLE IN THE LIVES
OF INDIVIDUALS AND COUNTRIES.
THE JOURNEY TO THE TWIN
SOURCES OF THE RHINE
CLIMBS THROUGH SOME
OF THE MOST SPECTACULAR
AND DRAMATIC LANDSCAPES
ON THE CONTINENT.
STEEP ROCKS LINE BOTH SIDES
OF THIS NARROW VALLEY
WHERE THE RHINE IS NO
LONGER A NAVIGABLE WATERWAY.
THIS IS THE RUINAULTA, ALSO
KNOWN AS THE RHINE GRAND CANYON,
AND IT LEADS TO THE SECONDARY
SOURCE OF THE GREAT RHINE.
THIS SMALL FROZEN LAKE IS THE
SOURCE OF THE VORDERRHEIN.
BUT THE MAJOR BIRTHPLACE
OF THE RHINE IS THE
RHEINFELDEN GLACIER,
AFFECTIONATELY NAMED
"PARADISE", AFTER AN
ANCIENT FOLK TALE.
IT'S HERE THAT THE THREAT TO THE
RIVER BECOMES ALL TOO CLEAR.
PASSED DOWN FROM
GENERATION TO GENERATION,
THE FOLK TALE TELLS OF A
POOR FARMER WHO LIVED
IN THIS VALLEY, WHO'S ONLY
POSSESSION WAS A TINY FIELD
ON TOP OF THE ALPS
CALLED "PARADISE".
A GREEDY NEIGHBOR
STOLE THE LAND
BUT MOTHER NATURE
CAST HER SPELL
AND IN THE MORNING
THE FIELD WAS HIDDEN
UNDER A THICK
BLANKET OF ICE,
FORMING THE
RHEINFELDEN GLACIER
AND THE SOURCE
OF THE RHINE.
TODAY THIS LITTLE PARADISE
IS UNDER THREAT ONCE MORE.
THE GLACIER'S LOST A QUARTER
OF ITS VOLUME IN JUST 25 YEARS.
HERR AND FRAU LOIREZ HAVE LIVED
AND FARMED IN HINTERRHEIN
BENEATH THE GLACIER
ALL THEIR LIVES.
TRANSLATOR: IT'S COMMON LAND
ON TOP OF THE MOUNTAIN.
EVERYBODY
OWNS THE LAND.
YES, THE WHOLE
VILLAGE OWNS IT
AND THEN THERE'S A
SHEPHERD UP THERE.
WE SHARE HIM -
WE ALL SHARE HIM
AND SO WE DON'T HAVE TO
WORRY TOO MUCH AS LONG AS
EVERYONE UNDERSTANDS EACH
OTHER AND WE DON'T QUARREL.
WHEN THERE IS A
DISAGREEMENT IT'S DIFFICULT
AND EVERYONE
HAS TO NEGOTIATE.
>>YOU DON'T NEED TO BE AN
ENVIRONMENTAL EXPERT TO NOTICE
THE SHRINKING OF THE
GLACIER IN HINTERRHEIN.
THE PEOPLE HERE KNOW THAT THEIR
ENVIRONMENT IS CHANGING FAST.
TRANSLATOR: MY FATHER
ALWAYS USED TO SAY THAT IT TOOK
TEN MINUTES TO WALK FROM
THE VILLAGE TO THE GLACIER.
AND NOW THESE DAYS YOU
CAN WALK FOR THREE HOURS
AND YOU'RE STILL
NOT AT THE GLACIER.
AND WHEN MY FATHER USED TO SAY
THAT IT WAS ONLY IN THE 1920'S.
BEFORE WHEN IT RAINED IT
ALL STAYED ON THE MOUNTAIN,
BUT NOW IT ALL
COMES SLIDING DOWN
AND THERE'S A
DANGER OF AVALANCHE.
AND IT KEEPS ON COMING IN
A STRONG FLOW FOR A WEEK
AND THEN THE WHOLE
THING STOPS AGAIN.
THAT'S THE
DIFFERENCE FOR SURE.
>>AND IF THE GLACIER
THAWS TO NOTHING,
THE EFFECTS COULD
BE JUST AS TERRIBLE.
TRANSLATOR: THE DRINKING
WATER IN THE VILLAGE COMES FROM
A VERY GOOD SOURCE BUT IF
THERE'S NOTHING FLOWING DOWN
IT WOULD BE LIKE
A DESERT HERE.
>>AS THE RELENTLESS MELTING
OF THE GLACIER CONTINUES,
THE RHINE AND THE LIVES OF
ALL THOSE WHO DEPEND ON IT
ARE IN DANGER.
IF THE SOURCE OF THE RIVER RUNS
DRY, WHAT THEN FOR THE FARMERS
AND THE FISHERMEN, THE
COUNTRIES AND THEIR BOUNDARIES,
THE COMMUNITIES
AND THEIR CULTURE?
IF THE COURSE OF THE
RIVER IS CHANGED FOREVER,
LIFE IN THIS PART OF THE WORLD
WILL BE UNRECOGNIZABLE.
THE RHINE IS A RIVER
OF STUNNING BEAUTY
AND GREAT
HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE.
THESE WATERS POWER
THE ECONOMY OF EUROPE.
SINCE TIME IMMEMORIAL THE
RIVER HAS SERVED MANY LANDS
AND PEOPLES - FROM
THOSE WHO LIVE NEAR IT
TO THOSE WHO LIVE
THOUSANDS OF MILES AWAY.
PEOPLE HAVE FOUGHT TO OWN THE
RHINE AND THE LAND ON ITS BANKS.
PERHAPS THE TIME HAS COME
FOR THOSE PEOPLE TO UNITE
TO SAVE THE RIVER AND TO FIGHT
SIDE BY SIDE FOR ITS FUTURE.